*** To collect the data we leveraged a simulated population from "The Islands". ***

Reseach Question: 

Which type of exercise is the most effective at reducing cortisol (stress) levels? 

Abstract:

This study examines how varying physical exercise intensities (no exercise, walking outdoors, yoga, swimming, strength training, running outdoors) affect immediate stress responses by measuring salivary cortisol levels. Our research question is: What type of exercise is the most effective at reducing cortisol levels? Participants will provide preliminary saliva samples, engage in exercises ranging from low to high intensity, and then provide subsequent saliva samples once again. We have six treatment levels (types of exercise) and block our data by age (6 levels) to reduce variability from factors such as energy and stress levels changing as people age. We construct an ANOVA summary table; however, our data indicates that none of the exercises contributed to lowering or increasing the cortisol levels of our participants. Despite this, we conducted post hoc data analysis to assess potentially significant pairs and found that walking has the potential to have a significant effect on stress levels in comparison to doing nothing. We additionally performed residual analysis and concluded that our model’s assumptions are valid. This means our data collection is accurate, but other nuisance factors we did not control for might have influenced our results.  

Introduction:

In recent years, growing research has been directed toward the role of physical activity in mental health, particularly in managing stress (American Psychological Association, 2020). Understanding the causal relationship between exercise and stress could help prevent or treat stress-induced illnesses by simply promoting physical activity (Sharon-David & Tenenbaum, 2017). As college students, we were also particularly interested in exploring this research topic because stress is something many students deal with on a regular basis, and we hope to find practical ways to alleviate this barrier to academic success. 

In this project, we aim to design an experiment that statistically explains the immediate effects of exercise intensity on salivary cortisol levels using ‘The Islands’ virtual simulation. Our population of interest is individuals aged 12+, as Islanders under this threshold are unable to perform certain exercises. We conducted this study using a randomized complete block design to analyze how five treatment exercises (brisk walking outdoors, yoga, freestyle swimming, strength training, and running outdoors) influence salivary cortisol compared to the control group (no exercise) and with one another. We will then perform data analysis, residual analysis, and a power test using R to determine which variables were significant, if any, and ensure our model assumptions are valid. Once we fit a final population model, we will conclude by discussing experiment limitations and real-world implications. 

Design of the experiment:

We use a complete randomized block design. We have six levels for the treatment factor: yoga, swimming, strength training, running outdoors, walking outdoors, and doing nothing (as a control group). We also block the participants by age into six categories: 12-19, 20-29, 30-39, 40-49, 50-59, 60-99. This is justified because energy and stress levels change as people age, and blocking reduces the variability of the effect of age on the treatment.

We decided on a total of 90 participants, with 30 selected from each of the islands. There were 90 replicates (six treatments, each with 15 participants), resulting in 180 observations (cortisol levels before and after exercise). We used R to randomly sample cities within each island with replacement. Then we randomly sampled the houses without replacement to avoid confounding variables such as housing situation. If more than one person lived in the house, we would randomly pick one of them, using R, to participate in the experiment. 

If a person refused to be a participant in the study, withdrew, or passed away, we resampled from houses in the same city to find a replacement. For each island, we used a random number generator to assign a number to each participant and then sorted them randomly based on this number. We then listed the treatments and used R to randomly generate a treatment order. Every five participants were assigned the treatment based on that order for each island. 

The initial experiment was only blocked by island, so when we switched to blocking by age, we had to resample because the blocks ended up unbalanced, with some blocks having zero participants for a certain treatment. The blocks were still unbalanced, but every block had at least one participant for each treatment after resampling. We decided to resample instead of adding more participants because we had equal variances in our treatment groups. According to Karen Grace-Martin, if we have an unequal sample size, this can be remedied by having equal variances in our groups. While this isn’t ideal, this supports the idea that since we have equal variance, we just made sure all the age groups were not empty (Grace-Martin, K., 2023).
